Digital business transformation – a holistic approach
Digital technologies – and the ways we use them in our personal lives, work and society – have changed the face of business and will continue to do so. This has always been so but the pace at which it is happening is accelerating and faster than the pace of transformation in organizations.
Digital transformation is probably not the best term to describe the realities it covers. Some prefer to use the term digital business transformation, which is more in line with the business aspect. However, as an umbrella term, digital transformation is also used for changes in meanings that are not about business in the strict sense but about evolutions and changes in, for instance, government and society, regulations and economic conditions on top of the challenges posed by so-called disruptive newcomers.
It is key to recognize the umbrella term dimension of digital transformation at all times. While digital transformation maturity models can help in defining visions they are too simplistic and/or general in practice.
Digital transformation covers a huge number of processes, interactions, transactions, technological evolutions, changes, internal and external factors, industries and so forth. So, when reading advice on digital transformation or reading reports and predictions it’s essential to keep this in mind. Although there are common challenges, goals and traits in organizations across the globe, there are also enormous differences per industry, region and organization. What could make sense in one region, doesn’t have to make sense in another, even if we just look at regulatory environments.
Digital transformation and hyper-connectedness: focus on the edges
Customer and customer experience, purpose and end goals, partners, stakeholders, the last mile of processes and disruption often sit and occur at these edges and are key for digital transformation. Sometimes digital transformation is even narrowed down to customer experience alone but, strictly speaking, this a mistake, leaving out several other aspects.
The end goals of the business, customers and stakeholders, however, do drive the agenda. The central role of the organization is to connect the dots and overcome internal silos in all areas in order to reach these different goals as interconnectedness is the norm. In other words: although the focus shift towards the edges, the central capabilities are realized in order to work faster and better for and at the edges. This happens for instance at organizational (integrated, ecosystems), technological (an ‘as-a-service approach’, cloud and agility enablers) and at a a cultural level.
The movement towards the edges also reflects in technologies and the decentralization of work and business models.
From a technology perspective think about how data analysis is moving to the edge, the decentralization of information management, the shifts in security towards the endpoints, the impact of the Internet of Things and much more.
Still, it does not mean that strategic decisions move to the edges or that digital transformation is only possibly in organizations with “new” organizational models. Enterprise-wide digital transformation requires leadership, regardless of how it is organized and as long as the holistic approach towards the goals with the edges in mind prevails over internal silos and de facto gaps between reality and perception. In practice we see that pilot projects on the way to a more holistic and enterprise-wide approach often happen bottom-up, ad hoc or in specific departments. This is normal, typical in early stages but, if not followed through on a broader level, a potential risk for long-term success.
Digital transformation in the integrated and connected sense which it requires can, among, others, touch upon the transformation of:
Business activities/functions: marketing, operations, human resources, administration, customer service, etc.
Business processes: one or more connected operations, activities and sets to achieve a specific business goal, whereby business process management, business process optimization and business process automation come into the picture (with new technologies such as RPA). Business process optimization is essential in digital transformation strategies and in most industries and cases is a mix of customer-facing goals and internal goals today.
Business models: how businesses function, from the go-to-market approach and value proposition to the ways it seeks to make money and effectively transforms its core business, tapping into novel revenue sources and approaches, sometimes even dropping the traditional core business after a while.
Business ecosystems: the networks of partners and stakeholders, as well as contextual factors affecting the business such as regulatory or economic priorities and evolutions. New ecosystems are built between companies with various background upon the fabric of digital transformation, information, whereby data and actionable intelligence become innovation assets.
Business asset management: whereby the focus lies on traditional assets but, increasingly, on less ‘tangible’ assets such as information and customers (enhancing customer experience is a leading goal of many digital transformaton “projects” and information is the lifeblood of business, technological evolutions and of any human relationship). Both customers and information need to be treated as real assets in all perspectives.
Organizational culture, whereby there must be a clear customer-centric, agile and hyper-aware goal which is achieved by acquiring core competencies across the board in areas such as digital maturity, leadership, knowledge worker silos and so forth. Culture also overlaps with processes, business activities, collaboration and the IT-side of digital transformation. In order to bring applications faster to market changes are required. That’s the essence of DevOps: development and operations. In order to make IT and OT work together in businesses/processes/activities, change is required too (it’s not just the information and operational technologies, it’s the processes, culture, collaboration). Etc.
Ecosystem and partnership models, with among others a rise of co-opetive, collaborative, co-creating and, last but not lost, entirely new business ecosystem approaches, leading to new business models and revenue sources. Ecosystems will be key in the as-a-service-economy and in achieving digital transformation success.
Customer, worker and partner approaches. Digital transformation puts people and strategy before technology. The changing behavior, expectations and needs of any stakeholder are crucial. This is expressed in many change subprojects whereby customer-centricity, user experience, worker empowerment, new workplace models, changing channel partner dynamics etc. (can) all come in the picture. It’s important to note that digital technologies never are the sole answer to tackle any of these human aspects, from worker satisfaction to customer experience enhancement. People involve, respect and empower other people in the first place, technology is an additional enabler and part of the equation of choice and fundamental needs
Causes of disruption and transformation
“Disruptions” and digital (business) transformation can be caused by numerous factors:
Technological innovations (technology-induced), which are more impactful than ever before. However, again, it’s not the technology that drives the disruption or transformation. It’s how it is used and adopted by customers, partners, competitors and various stakeholders. Technologies with clear disruption potential include IoT, artificial intelligence, edge computing, virtual and augmented reality and blockchain. However, the most disruptive potential occurs when they get combined and enable new applications as we see in the convergence of AI, IoT and big data analytics. In industrial transformation the convergence of IT and OT is also a game changer.
Customer behavior and demands. This so-called customer-induced transformation and disruption is not necessarily related to technology. Technology often enables or, as just mentioned, causes it, when adopted and turned into business challenges. An example of a force that drives digital transformation and is not caused by technology but merely strengthened by it in combination with other factors: the demand of customers for ease of use and simplicity in dealing with businesses is far older than today. It goes back to times when even the Internet didn’t exist. In that sense, digital transformation can be simply catching up too because businesses don’t have another option anymore (it’s not as if they didn’t know the importance of making interactions and support for customers easy and frictionless decades ago).
Innovation- and invention-induced. Entirely novel approaches to human and business challenges, as well as innovations and inventions that create a new reality, whether it’s in science, business, technology or even a non-technological context of true innovation can be disruptive. The invention of medicines that change healthcare and society (as has happened several times in the past), the printing press, the train, what can be next? Your best bet is probably in life sciences and the application of technology within the human body and mind.
Ecosystem-induced. Economical changes, demands from partners who want you to adapt, evolutions towards collaborations in transformational business ecosystems, regulatory changes (consider the transformational impact of the General Data Protection Regulation or GDPR for example), geo-political changes, the list is endless. Regulators are not just looking at the impact of digital technologies from a personal data protection perspective as they do with the GDPR in the EU of course. The world is full of new regulations and they do require transformational approaches on the level of people, processes, strategies AND technologies as anyone who has been serious about GDPR compliance can tell you. There are calls to regulate the IoT in the US and other countries, calls to regulate blockchain, the usage of IoT is already being limited in the upcoming EU ePrivacy Regulation (and GDPR), all across the globe energy efficiency and ecology are driving the agenda in smart buildings and smart cities (e.g. the revised Energy Performance of Buildings Directive in the EU that demands the usage of smart technologies and additional support for electrical cars), banking regulations are changing, the list is really endless.
and offers some realities.
Four digital transformation realities we want to emphasize:
Business/IT relationship is key (closing the gap between both, focusing on the same goals and NOT overlooking the role of IT).
There is a common DNA among digital leaders and the path to digital transformation shows common traits (even if context matters).
As said, each industry is impacted, including your industry. Customers, employees, partners, nor competitors or new, disruptive players, will wait for business to catch up, regardless of industry.
Digital transformation is led from the top (or at least requires firm buy-in from the top – and all stakeholders if it wants to succeed in an enterprise-wide way, de facto it also happens from the bottom up and from within specific projects). Often it’s the CEO, the Chief Digital Officer or the CIO but, depending on whom you ask the CMO also gets mentioned now and then.
Moving from transformational technology to transformation economy in 5 stages
Taking into account the just mentioned caveat about technology and IT, of course there is a clear link with digital technologies. So let’s take a look at the evolution towards this so-called digital transformation economy.
Stage 1: the 3rd Platform and digital business
In 2007 IDC introduced the 3rd Platform, back then consisting of four technological/business pillars: cloud, big data/analytics, social (business) and mobility.
Gartner called it the ‘Nexus of Forces‘ and, as others did, talked about SMAC (social, mobile, analytics and cloud). Regardless of the name: what mattered was that these technologies and, more importantly, their adoption by consumers, workers and businesses, their behavior-changing impact and the ways they were leveraged to achieve various goals were dramatically altering the business reality – a digital business reality.
Stage 2: the innovation accelerators of the third platform
The 3rd Platform, which is preceded by respectively the mainframe and client-server model era/platform, was joined by various other technologies which IDC called innovation accelerators.
These include robotics, natural interfaces, 3D Printing, the Internet of Things, cognitive systems and next generation security. So, we are still on a predominantly technological level here but with a clearer focus on business and customer innovation (on top of the traditional goals of optimization and so forth).
Stage 3: from transformation to innovation stage
What we see now, at least at companies that have deployed initiatives with a clear maturity in various areas and a longer term vision, is that innovation (regarding new business models, ways of engaging customers, building ecosystems of new revenue etc.) becomes key as the foundations, goals, strategy, culture and vision to do so are in place.
With the digital customer experience, innovation, competition, differentiation, automation, cost reduction, optimization, speed and experiences of stakeholders as business drivers, the mentioned technologies and the way they are used lead to that famous next wave or additional layer of innovation and of digital transformation. This in turn, IDC says, led to an innovation stage and information is essential to enable it. Digital transformation requires IT and information excellence in an end-to-end approach.
Stage 4: the acceleration of innovation and transformation
This stage of innovation and further challenges brought by disruptive business models will accelerate in the next years.
In other words: what we (will) see is that the pace of innovation and transformation is changing and resulting in a stage whereby the disruptive impact of digital transformation is about to be felt in every industry as enterprises flip the switch and massively scale up their digital transformation initiatives as IDC’s Frank Gens puts it, to secure a leadership role in the ‘digital industrial revolution’.
Stage 5: digital transformation at the core of a new economy
Finally, it’s this ‘digital industrial revolution’, which IDC dubbed the digital transformation economy or DX economy, that will put digital transformation at the center of growth and innovation strategies.
They will rapidly impact all industries even more and faster than we’ve seen before. And the innovation accelerators such as the Internet of Things, cognitive (artificial intelligence) and the likes will be key in this evolution, as are the ‘traditional’ backbones of the 3rd Platform (cloud, big data/analytics, mobile etc.)